# Simulating the Path of a Model Rocket Through Turbulent Wind

### Intro

If you are a model rocket enthusiast (especially one who has to operate with limited launching space), you are probably very familiar with the anxious feeling of not knowing where your rocket will land after it parachutes down. Will it land where you launched it? Will it land on a nearby road and get hit by a moving car? Or will it land in the nearby trees which you’ll have to climb to retrieve it.

For our project, we are planning on simulating the displacement of a model rocket flying through wind and parachuting back down to the ground. As demonstrated in the previous paragraph, this simulation would be useful for model rocket enthusiasts, who wish to know how far away and in which direction their rocket will land so that they can set it up in a safe location and prevent losing their potentially expensive rocket.

Although we would have loved to simulate the flight path of a real rocket or spaceship, that task seemed a little too complex and unfeasible for such a short timeline, so we decided to go with something more manageable. That being said, this model still has plenty of complexity to it, and would be an interesting problem to model. The randomness in a wind environment, the thrust of the engine, the time at which the parachute opens, and the angle at which the rocket is launched, all add to the complexity of the model. 

### Model Description

As mentioned in the Introduction, the goal of our model is to simulate how a model rocket is displaced when launched through a wind environment. Our model is going to simulate the rocket moving through a 3 dimensional grid of wind vectors (each vector has an x, y, and z scalar). The rocket starts out at ground level in the middle of the wind grid (i.e. if the wind grid is 500x500x500 meters, the rocket will start out at 250,250,0). When the simulation starts, the rocket accelerates for a certain number of steps and then free flies through the grid of wind until it reaches its peak (it is being pulled down by gravity the entire time). Once the rocket begins to fall (vertical velocity passes a certain threshold), its parachute is deployed, and the rocket slowly coasts down to the ground. The entire time from the rocket free flying to landing on the ground, the rocket is accelerated by the current closest wind vector in the environment. We will be measuring the displacement of the rocket from its launch point after it lands back onto the ground.

When thinking about how to model a rocket flying through turbulent wind, our group considered a variety of simulations/models. We considered using a cellular automaton model, because we had visualized the wind environment as a massive 3 dimensional grid of wind velocities. However, this ended up not being optimal for us because cellular automaton models require the computer to traverse through each cell and update them, and thus would be extremely slow (a mere 100x100x100 grid would require over a million iterations per update). We also thought about using a Monte Carlo model because there was an element of randomness in our simulation (the wind speeds), but it didn’t match our problem much at all. In the end, we decided to use an agent based model, because we would be performing an update on just the single moving part of our model (the model rocket) in its environment.

The agent in our model will be the model rocket. The environment that the rocket is moving through will be a 3 dimensional array of wind speed, with each cell of the 3 dimensional array will hold a 3D vector (x, y, and z speeds). Once the user provides an average wind vector (3D vector), the environment will be populated with wind vectors that vary based on a standard distribution (scalar provided by user). On top of this variation, when populating the vectors, the velocity of these wind vectors will also be scaled according to the height, to simulate stronger winds at higher altitudes. The rocket will have a constant force of gravity applied on it.

Included below are the model parameters that can be tuned by the user:
Environment Size: This parameter represents the length of a single side of the 3D wind vector grid. For example, if the user provides a value of 250, then the environment will be initialized as a 3d array with shape (250, 250, 250). For more volatile and fast paced wind, a larger value is recommended as the rocket could move out of the wind grid if it’s too small.
Average Wind Vector: Since wind is normally quite uniform, at least on the micro scale, we are allowing the user to input an average wind vector for the environment. This value could be collected using some kind of sensor before the launch at the site.
Average Wind Standard Deviation. To allow the user to simulate a more volatile and random environment, they are able to input a wind standard deviation. This allows them to model more realistic/stochastic behavior in the real world.
Propulsion Time. This is the number of steps (seconds) that the model rocket should be accelerating for. Value comes from model rocket engine specifications (see Figure 2) 
Parachute Deployment Velocity: Vertical velocity (must be negative, so that it only deploys when falling) at which to deploy the parachute. Value can come from model rocket specifications.
Rocket Launch Angle (pitch and yaw): Usually set to straight up vertically, but can be specified by the user to create a diagonal launch.

Below are a few assumptions that we are operating under for this model:
Drag and air resistance are negligible: Although these forces can be added into the model for additional accuracy, for now we will be modeling the model rocket as if only gravity and push forces from the wind are acting on it.
The rocket can be defined by a single point: To simplify the calculation of push forces by the wind, our model will treat the model rocket as a single point. This means that no angular momentum / rotation will be at play. 
Wind speed does not change over each individual test. Although wind speeds might change slightly over the simulation time, we are going to ignore this in our simulation since it would be really hard for the user to provide accurate data.
The ground is level. 
